---
layout: post
title:  "Power System 101"
date:   2024-11-26T00:00:00-00:00
author: Cece
categories: "Insight"
tags: "Clean-Energy"
---

The modern-day power system has intricate designs. At the highest level, it has four components: electricity generation, transmission, distribution, and end-user consumption.

In the most centralized form, a utility company owns all three upstream components before electricity reaches the end customers. Such a utility company is called a vertically integrated company, overseeing electricity generation, transmission, and distribution. However, in many parts of the world, including most parts of the US, utility companies only own a part of the system, very often transmission and distribution only. They don't get to control who generates the electricity and how much it costs to generate the electricity. In these cases, the electricity generation is governed through a wholesale market, where many non-utility players, such as independent power producers (IPP), bid into the market and set the price based on market equilibrium. And utility companies provide the 'wire' network to send the electricity from the power plants to the end customers.

This understanding of the power system can help us better contextualize technologies that are taking place under the theme of 'electrification'. As energy demand grows, how can the grid system better handle the increasing electricity load? Innovations are happening focusing on different parts of the power system and can be broadly categorized into three buckets:

**Generation - which governs the power supply:**

Traditionally, a power plant needs to be plugged into the utility network and go through the utility-owned transmission and distribution lines before reaching the customers, which is known as utility-level power generation. More and more, we're seeing power generation at additional levels, including both the distribution level and the consumer level. At the distribution level, community solar is an example of how power is generated and connected to the distribution line instead of the transmission line. At the consumer level, more consumers are now generating power directly on-site, known as the 'prosumer,' through the 'VPP' solutions. Residential customers can adopt VPP solutions through residential solar and batteries. An even more fast-growing space is seen on the commercial customer side. Driven by the high growth of AI and data centers, tech companies are tapping into solutions that allow them to power data centers directly through their power generation, very often by co-locating with power plants (even nuclear power plants).

**Consumption - which decides the power demand:**

Power demand varies during the day. The power system is built to handle capacity during peak hours and is not fully utilized for the remaining part of the day. Solutions that can help shift electricity load out of the peak hours, therefore effectively unlocking additional capacity from our existing system while saving money for customers, which makes it highly attractive to both the utility company and the end users. Electricity storage is one way to address this and has seen exciting new technologies and deployment momentum. Many startups are also working on SaaS solutions to make electricity consumption more transparent and allow customers to optimize their electricity usage in a smart way.

**Transmission and distribution - which connects the two:**

Still owned by the utility, this part of the system, while falling behind in innovation, is pushed to change as the load grows exponentially. More transmission and distribution lines need to be built, period. Lacking that, innovative solutions for managing the system's efficiency while ensuring resource adequacy and reliability are also becoming increasingly critical.
